[Music]
twelve lesser efforts
the organization's created by Pinkerton
Seward Baker Dodge
Carrington Myer and stager were the
major sophisticated intelligence
structures of the Civil War experience
within the Union forces for a while a
bureau of military information was
maintained in the War Department under
Colonel George H Sharpe who maintained
the unit from March of 1863 until the
end of the war he held some
investigative powers by virtue of his
position as deputy provost marshal
general and coordinated intelligence for
General Grant during the final year of
the war with a high degree of affect
quote we run across a few other spy
chiefs who had some contemporary fame in
their own right and with whom records
and memoirs often bring us face to face
among them was Colonel William Truesdale
actually a civilian like Pinkerton head
of the police chief for General William
s Rosencrantz both in the army of the
Mississippi and the Department of the
Cumberland Truesdale host of duties
included the employment of Scouts and
spies within and about the enemy's lines
to furnish intelligence for the
commanding general the men were
carefully selected and most of them were
well acquainted with the surrounding
country and its inhabitants what in the
Revolutionary days would have been
styled a channel of intelligence was
said to have been maintained to the
extreme limits of the Southern
Confederacy then there was major Henry B
Smith general Lew Wallace's Chief of
Detectives in the middle Department 1864
through 1865 whom Wallace called a man
of ability and zeal in that department
whose headquarters were at Baltimore
treason flourished and plots grew and
counter espionage needed to be as it was
under major Smith's Direction adroit and
unremitting it was Smith who at
Baltimore in March 1865 administered the
oath of allegiance to Lewis Paine Lewis
Thornton Powell later hanged as a party
to the conspiracy to murder Lincoln
he inserted in the parole a clause
requiring pain to go north of
Philadelphia and remain during the war
but pain was one who honored paroles
rather in the breach than in the
observance in nineteen eleven Smith
published between the lines a decidedly
unusual volume presenting material from
his wartime files and throwing new light
on conditions in Maryland and Northern
Virginia
end quote another important intelligence
element which should be noted but which
attained no degree of organizational
sophistication is the Scout Corps common
to virtually every Union combat command
the scouts were often an ad-hoc body of
changing faces the most celebrated
leader of these forces was Maj Harry
young general Sheridan's chief of scouts
quote scouting in the Civil War was
something more than touring the no-man's
land between opposing camps Young had
authority to raise a command of a
hundred men but the role never exceeded
60 and was usually nearer 40 the men
were in Confederate uniforms more often
than in their own carrying a Spencer
carbine and two revolvers they were the
aristocrats of the army much as the men
of the air service were in the First
World War
each was allowed for picked mounts they
lived in the best quarters to be had
they were exempt from camp routine they
were paid in gold according to the value
of intelligence obtained or services
rendered they might go in small details
a few men at a time or they might sally
out in force on some major expedition
they work to surprise and capture or if
necessary kill the enemy's pickets and
vedettes to harass enemy patrols to
pounce upon guerrilla bands once Young
and his little company stampeded a
Cavalry Brigade and they were also to
gather intelligence in any case they
wore the enemy's uniform and sometimes
other disguises within the enemy's lines
in order to deceive therefore under
military law if taken within or about
the enemy's lines they were to be
treated as spies and suffered death end
quote
those serving under general Fremont in
this capacity during the spring and
summer of 1862 were given the name Jesse
Scouts in honor of the commander's wife
Jesse Benton the name became commonly
used by these daring riders after
Fremont had departed the theater and was
applied to any federal scout who wore
the gray in the Virginia area before the
Union forces were mustered out Harry
Young was to see intelligence service in
another field of operations quote after
Lee had surrendered the Mexican frontier
needed watching for the contest between
the French invaders and the Liberals was
still in progress
therefore Sheridan was ordered to the
Rio Grande with a Corps Colonel young he
was by now brevet 'add lieutenant
colonel went along taking with him four
of his old command Sheridan admits that
material aid was given the Liberals from
United States Arsenal's and he also
recommended young as a trusty go-between
and an agent who could furnish reliable
intelligence of affairs within Mexico
itself but outwardly there was adherence
to neutrality young however without
first getting Sheridan's approval took
liberal money raised a band of fifty or
so and attempted to cross the river a
fight ensued some were killed some
escaped young himself disappearing
completely end quote by the end of the
Civil War all military intelligence
operations virtually ceased to exist
undoubtedly some scouts were retained
for immediate observation duties in the
West in the Indian campaigns beyond this
the intelligence organizations created
by the Union Armed Forces establishment
was totally dismantled with the Peace of
Appomattox and the demise in the opinion
of at least one expert was not
necessarily a loss to be boom owned
quote from beginning to end of the Civil
War the ordinary hazards of professional
espionage were doubled and trebled by
the inexperienced or downright and
comput
of staff officers assigned to
intelligence the transmitting of
information was primitive and
unsystematic
where cypher messages were resorted to
the ciphers were so transparently
contrived they did a little more than
guarantee the guilt of the bearer in
addition while men and women fashioned
for themselves a hair breath existence
to penetrate the secrets of the enemy
what they learned and communicated was
too seldom interpreted effectively often
spy reports were ignored until all their
military value and timeliness had
subsided into history end quote
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you